# Building an OWASP Chapter into a Vibrant Community
## Collected Thoughts
### Garth Boyd
#### January 2026

I was asked by someone about tips on running a chapter. I had been planning on making notes about lessons learned and what worked, and what didn’t to help OWASP Ottawa, and others running chapters. This page is the result.

I started volunteering for OWASP Ottawa around 2012-ish I would like to say. This started with finding speakers. Then co-lead. Then covid happened and everything went crazy. Melody and I were transmitting from the covid-bunker and eventually we restarted in-person and rebuilt the chapter. These notes are based on all these challenges and experiences.

## The list mostly ranked by importance
1. **Consistency** - Regular cadence (e.g. third Wednesday of the month) at the same time in the same place. The consistency provides potential attendees a way to plan because they always know when it's going to happen. This only changes if there is a marquee speaker that is from out of town with a schedule that cannot accommodate our 3rd Wednesday schedule.
2. **Partnering** - Finding partners for venue, food and beverage helps reduce costs (see costs below). Having a free venue (university, employer, etc) is a fundamental baseline to help success. By partnering with organizations to pay for things (e.g. pizza) in kind then you are not going through the bureaucracy of OWASP to be reimbursed. Champion your partners (eg. Social media) so they are getting something in return.
3. **Venue** - Having a central location with transit and parking options helps people from different locations in your region attend. Like any modern city Ottawa has east, west, and south sections around a central downtown area. Having it anywhere but downtown means that the other three sections have to travel that much farther. This introduces friction. Therefore a central location with ready access to transit is essential. We were extremely fortunate to partner with University of Ottawa engineering who provided a free venue. Many chapters have to pay for a venue so in that regard we are extremely fortunate.
4. **Speakers** - Speakers must reflect the community at large and by this they have to “look” like the community. You want your audience to watch a speaker and say “they are speaking to me”, “they know my world”, and “I can speak and share here too”. Having a speaker roster that looks the same and not a reflection of the diaspora appearing at your meetings will not achieve this. This includes race, gender, gender-expression, and age. This is a chance to champion your community.
5. **Costs** - The foundation appreciates chapters who cost them little money and no hassle. So when you do need their help you have their respect and will be willing to help.
6. **Livestream** - We started this during COVID lockdown and our community liked it so much we continued afterwards. Because life happens and not everyone can make it in person. All our livestreams are added to our YouTube channel which are organized into playlists by subject and year. This has enabled our community to engage on their schedule. Have this automatically update the chapter YouTube channel.
7. **Volunteers** - This is the hardest part. Humans will always be the weakest link. Finding willing volunteers who do what they say they are going to do when they say they are going to do it is hard. When someone approaches you to volunteer, give them a single simple task. If they are reliable then add more responsibility in stages. Eventually you train them to be a co-lead. At the time of this writing OWASP Ottawa is very lucky to have a group of volunteers who are hard working, caring, and step up to the challenges they are faced with.
8. **Organization** - Separate discrete tasks and assign volunteers. For each meetup we have a list of things that must happen and who is doing it. We have a template that evolves based on needs. We duplicate this template somewhat for workshops. As volunteers become adept, show leadership, and reliability,  they can work towards being a chapter lead. Having a regular organizers meeting (online or in person) helps keep everyone on track, informed, and engaged.
9. **Co-leads** - Choose co-leads based on a lengthy time working with them as volunteers. A chapter is not about one person, or two. When you consider a co-lead, think about their potential ability to continue the chapter after you step away. OWASP requires that a chapter have at least two leads. This is not only a good idea to avoid stressing out a single lead but from a continuity perspective the other lead can carry on while you are vacationing, sick, or dealing with hair-on-fire work issues. See succession planning below.
10. **Communication** - Create your own slack or discord and organize channels for the general public separate from volunteers. It is recommended to use tools with auto-post facilities (LinkedIN has a facility, there are other tools) that will help deal with getting the message out there.
11. **Marketing** - Social media is key here and a regular pulse of content shows that you are real and serious. Be conscious of the selection of hashtags appropriate for the subject and the area.
12. **Food and Beverage** - Once we emerged from Covid lockdown, and had a venue (free) at the University of Ottawa we had attendances of around 15 people. This easily doubled as soon as we started providing pizza. Why? It's not that people (and these are not just students) travel for pizza. The reason is that if you are holding an evening event it will introduce friction if attendees have to source their own food. If they do not have to worry about it, then it's easy for them to attend.
13. **Workshops** - Meetups are great but the real educational value are workshops and CTFs. They are more work to organize but they help a chapter stand out.
14. **Succession planning** - No chapter should be about one person. Chapters IMO should be about community and supporting the members in that community to skill up, find jobs, and self-improvement. Therefore it's important for that community to know that everyone can elevate themselves to lead. It's important to show that everyone can step up to volunteer and that over time eventually elevates to leadership.
15. **Mother OWASP** - I first heard this term when I started volunteering at the Chapter. Yes, the chapter stands under the OWASP Banner. But your first responsibility is your community. The OWASP Foundation likes chapters that take care of themselves and are not constantly asking for money. If you restrict your requests for support to only those things that are absolutely necessary they will respect that and support the chapter when it really needs it. The other point is that you need to manage resources not controlled by the foundation. The reason being is that they change the resources they can support based on their budget (for example, the Meetup “rug-pull”). The change of supported resources will cause confusion and churn with your chapter membership. The solution is to manage your own social media accounts, GitHub repositories, and other resources that you engage your community with so that there is a consistent and stable presence.
16. **Expand your horizons** - Speaking at other meetups will expose the chapter to other communities and increase your visibility and membership.
17. **Greeter** - Have someone at the door to greet people who are new and introduce them to others. This shows its a warm and welcoming community. In addition, having someone at the door is a signal to those that just want to grift pizza to get lost.
